---
layout: post
title: "Why I Vim"
date: 2017-08-02
tag: Tools
blog: true
author: chidonna
projects: false
summary: "The reason I use Vim for code and editing text"
headerImage: false
draft: false
---
5 months ago, if you had an interview with me on Vim, it would have gone like this:

{% highlight text %}
You:  Why do you use Vim?
Me:   I'm not really sure, I think every good programmer uses it,
      and its popular among experienced programmers
You:  Which do you prefer? GVim (GUI version of Vim) or terminal Vim ?
Me:   GVim! Because it so much easier to use (with the tool bars
      and hints) and mouse usage very well.
{% endhighlight %}

From that conversation I think you can say I never understood at all the power, purpose and reason for Vim. I just used it because it was some norm or hacker culture I had to take part in to be qualified as a good programmer.

Fast forward to present day, I am writing this post in [Vim][vim] ([Neovim][nvim] to be precise), and I would have a totally different answer to "Why do you use Vim ?". My answer would be, that is the only thing I can use, and I most definitely prefer using Vim on the terminal to guiVim (on any machine) because it greatly improves my workflow; when having to manage various virtual environments (when working with python), development servers and also use the various Unix tools, and most importantly trying to multi-task i.e play music, work on various projects, blog and many other things (thanks to [TMUX](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki)).

I am far from very proficient in using Vim. In fact I am still a beginner, still learning to **grok vi**, but I can tell you, this is most important tool in my toolbox, and one of the most daring from a configuration point of view. I currently use Neovim and not Vim though what I say applies 100 percent to both. 

I used to be an avid [Sublime Text][st] user and had set up my Sublime Text to imitate an IDE, with various plugins here and there, and was making proper use of the inbuilt functionality that came with it (like multiple selections to edit multiple lines, and Control-P for fuzzy finding and finding symbols within files and projects). So switching to Vim was in no way an easy one (I even made up my mind to go back to using Sublime Text a couple times), as Vim is known to have a steep learning curve. After first going through the Vim-tutor and checking various sites like [Vimcast](http://vimcasts.org/) and going through the "help" in Vim, I have come to settle down comfortable in Vim and do not miss anything in Sublime Text, so I **cannot** go back to using Sublime Text or any text editor.
I have tried out many editors like Sublime Text, Atom, Visual Studio Code, Geany, The Eric Python IDE and used Emacs and Spacemacs a little and IMO none has been as effective as Vim is.

I will tell you 2 (of many) reasons why I use Vim or Neovim and not Emacs, Sublime Text or any IDE (the other reasons can not be explained but only realized through experience).

### 1. Modal Editing
A Modal Editor is text editor that offers multiple interaction modes optimized for specific types of actions and interaction. In the case of Vim, there is the Normal mode, Insert Mode, Visual Mode which are the most common of the various modes Vim has. Check out a more detailed explanation [here](https://wincent.com/wiki/Modal_editor).

With various text editors coming out and those that have been in existence, you could argue that everything I have said can be done and probably even better by other editors, like Emacs. To be honest I have very little experience with Emacs and have not it beyond basic editing, then I gave up on it. Then there is [spacemacs][semacs] that tries to combine the features of Vim and the modal editing capabilities of Vim.
> The best editor is neither Emacs nor Vim, it's Emacs and Vim!.
>
>> -- <cite>**spacemacs**</cite>

I mean, why buy a "Fiat" when you could buy a "Ferrari". Just go for the main thing (which is Vim) in lieu of some copy cat that offers peanuts compared to what Vim has in its arsenal

### 2. Customization
While Emacs can very well compete with Vim on this, no other editor, IDE or text processing application is close to what Vim offers. Using VimL or Vimscript you can extend Vim to whatever you like and very easily. This I believe is a very big plus to any editor and has been one of the main reasons as to why Vim has stood the test of time (since November 1991), long before I was born.

---

I would like to say while I am not preaching Vim, or trying to stir up an editor way. I am simply pointing out the features and limitless possibilities Vim offers and feel free to use which ever editor or IDE, you prefer.

If you happen to be curious as to how I have configured my Vim, consider reading my next blog post on HOW I VIM.

#### Finally:
This is my very first blog post, written in Neovim, hosted on [GitHub][GH] using [GitHub Pages][gh] and transformed by [Jekyll][jekyll]. If you disagree with me or would like to share something with me, feel free to send me an email or a tweet anytime.

[GH]: https://github.com/
[gh]: https://pages.github.com/
[jekyll]: http://jekyllrb.com/
[st]: https://www.sublimetext.com/
[nvim]: https://neovim.io/
[vim]: https://github.com/vim/vim
[emacs]: https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/
[semacs]: http://spacemacs.org/
